Include all Teleport CAs in the rotation guide (#40852)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/management/operations/ca-rotation.mdx

---
title: Certificate Authority Rotation
description: Describes how to rotate Teleport's certificate authorities.
tocDepth: 3
---

Various components of a Teleport cluster authenticate to one another using
either X.509 or SSH certificates. To verify certificates, Teleport maintains

> several certificate authorities. You can rotate Teleport CAs to prevent

Reviewer: I would say that Teleport uses the certificate authorities to _issue certificates_. Verification against the CA is done by the target resources (Windows desktop, database, SSH node, etc)

   CA](#host).
1. `standby`: No rotation in progress. All operations have completed.

Before the final `standby` phase, you an also put the rotation in the `rollback`
phase, aborting the rotation and returning to the original certificate
authority.

CA rotations can be **manual** or **semi-automatic**. In manual mode, admins
must instruct the Teleport Auth Service to advance from one phase to the next.
Between phases, admins can prepare their infrastructure to adjust to each
change. In semi-automatic mode, the Teleport Auth Service cycles through each
phase automatically, with a grace period between each phase.

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

- (!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/4. Choose a CA to rotate

When rotating a CA, you need to check that any infrastructure that relies on the
CA has not lost connectivity. You may also need to export the new CA to that
infrastructure. Choose one of the CAs below to determine how to keep it up to
date during the migration.

We recommend rotating a single CA at a time in order to reduce complexity. The
exception is rotating the `db` and `db_client` CAs. 

> |CA type|Traffic it authenticates|

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|CA type|Certificates it issues|
```

Perhaps?

|---|---|
|[`host`](#host)|Traffic between Teleport agents and Proxy Service instances and the Teleport Auth Service.|
|[`user`](#user)|Traffic from authenticated Teleport users. Client traffic from the Teleport SSH Service and OpenSSH clients to Teleport-protected servers. Client traffic from the Windows Desktop Service to Teleport-protected desktops.|
|[`db`](#db-and-db_client)|Server traffic from self-hosted databases protected by Teleport.|
|[`db_client`](#db-and-db_client)|Client traffic from the Teleport Database Service to self-hosted databases protected by Teleport.|
|[`openssh`](#openssh)|Client traffic to OpenSSH servers enrolled in your Teleport cluster.|
|[`jwt`](#jwt)|Traffic from the Teleport Application Service to applications that accept Teleport-issued JSON web tokens.|
|[`saml_idp`](#saml_idp)|Traffic from the Teleport SAML IdP to service providers.|
|[`oidc_idp`](#oidc_idp)|Traffic from the Teleport OIDC IdP integration, which authenticates to AWS for features like EICE EC2 Access, External Audit Storage, Auto-Discovery, and AWS Sync for Access Graph.|

### `host`

> The `host` CA authenticates traffic between Teleport agents and Proxy Service
> instances and the Teleport Auth Service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `host` CA issues certificates for Teleport cluster components (agents
 and Proxy Service
instances and the Teleport Auth Service).
```

or SSH certificates. To issue certificates, Teleport maintains several
certificate authorities. You can rotate Teleport CAs to prevent malicious actors
from impersonating part of your Teleport cluster. This guide explains the CAs
that Teleport maintains and how to rotate them.

We recommend becoming familiar with the entire guide before following the steps,
as you should be ready to roll back the CA rotation if it does not proceed as
expected.

## How it works

Teleport maintains its CAs independently of one another, and rotating one CA
does not affect the rotation status of the others. The rotation process is
designed to take place in **phases**, which give operators time to update their
infrastructure and roll back a CA rotation if necessary.

Teleport CA rotation takes place in five phases for each CA. The phases have the
following order:

1. `standby`: No rotation in progress. No operations have begun.
1. `init`: A new certificate authority is issued, but not used.
1. `update_clients`: The Teleport Auth Service uses the new CA to sign
   certificates but continues to trust certificates signed by the original CA.

> 1. `update_servers`: Teleport servers (Agents, Auth Service, and Proxy Service

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. `update_servers`: Teleport cluster components (Agents, Auth Service, and Proxy Service
```

   CA](#host).
1. `standby`: No rotation in progress. All operations have completed.

Before the final `standby` phase, you an also put the rotation in the `rollback`
phase, aborting the rotation and returning to the original certificate
authority.

CA rotations can be **manual** or **semi-automatic**. In manual mode, admins
must instruct the Teleport Auth Service to advance from one phase to the next.
Between phases, admins can prepare their infrastructure to adjust to each
change. In semi-automatic mode, the Teleport Auth Service cycles through each
phase automatically, with a grace period between each phase.

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

- (!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/4. Choose a CA to rotate

When rotating a CA, you need to check that any infrastructure that relies on the
CA has not lost connectivity. You may also need to export the new CA to your
infrastructure. Choose one of the CAs below to determine how to keep it up to
date during the migration.

We recommend rotating a single CA at a time in order to reduce complexity. The
exception is rotating the `db` and `db_client` CAs. 

|CA type|Certificate subjects|Verified by|

> |---|---|

Reviewer 2: table rendering fix:
```suggestion
|---|---|---|
```

Reviewer 2: I think we should drop the "verified by" column.

Accurately describing and enumerating the things that verify certs issued by a given CA is too much info.

when adding Teleport services after `host` CA rotation.

### `user`

The `user` CA issues a certificate when a user authenticates to Teleport. It
also signs client certificates for the Windows Desktop Service and Teleport SSH
Service. Teleport-protected servers and Windows desktops use these certificates
to verify connecting clients.

Once you have completed the rotation and reached the final `standby` phase,
users who have signed into Teleport must reauthenticate to receive a user
certificate from the new CA, otherwise Teleport client commands fail.

If you have registered Windows desktops with Teleport, [follow the
guide](../../desktop-access/active-directory-manual.mdx) to exporting the
Teleport user CA so the Windows Desktop Service can authenticate to RDP hosts.
Verify that you can connect to registered desktops throughout the rotation.

### `db` and `db_client`

The `db` and `db_client` CAs issue certificates that the Teleport Database
Service uses to communicate with self-hosted databases. 

The Teleport Database Service presents a certificate signed by the `db_client`
CA when communicating with a self-hosted database, which an admin configures to

> trust certificates issued by the CA. Self-hosted databases present a certificate
> signed by the `db` CA, which the Database Service uses to verify that a database
> server is a genuine Teleport-protected resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
trust certificates issued by the CA. Self-hosted databases can be issued a certificate by the `db` CA, which the Database Service uses by default to verify that a database
server is a genuine Teleport-protected resource.
```

it's optional to use a `db` CA cert - they can their own custom CA to issue a cert for their databases, but they must configure the db service to trust their custom CA

1. Transition to the `update_clients` phase:

   ```code
   $ tctl auth rotate --manual --type=<Var name="type" description="Certificate authority to rotate"/> --phase=update_clients
   # Updated rotation phase to "update_clients". To check status use 'tctl status'
   $ tctl status
   Cluster       teleport.example.com
   Version       (=teleport.version=)
   host CA       rotating clients (mode: manual, started: Sep 20 2023 01:44:36 UTC, ending: Sep 21 2023 07:44:36 UTC)
   user CA       never updated
   db CA         never updated
   db_client CA  never updated
   openssh CA    never updated
   jwt CA        never updated
   saml_idp CA   never updated
   oidc_idp CA   never updated
   CA pin        sha256:0000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000000
   ```

1. Check or update infrastructure that depends on your CA before proceeding to
   the next step.

1. If you lose connectivity to your resources, see if you need to reconfigure
   them to accept the new CA. If that does not restore access or you are unable
   to reconfigure a database, then [roll back](#rollback) to the original
   certificate authority.

### `update_servers`

> Initiate the `update_servers` phase. In this phase, Teleport servers (Agents,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Initiate the `update_servers` phase. In this phase, Teleport cluster components (Agents,
```

   Teleport-protected resources that rely on the CA that you rotated. This is
   the last stage where you have the opportunity to roll back. If you have lost
   connectivity to Teleport-protected resources, [roll back](#rollback) to the
   original certificate authority.

## Step 3/4. [Optional] Run a semi-automatic rotation

You can instruct Teleport to manage the CA rotation semi-automatically.
Semi-automatic rotation transitions between the phases of a rotation for you,
and there is no need to run a `tctl auth rotate` command each phase. After a
**grace period** elapses, the Teleport Auth Service updates the phase of the CA
rotation to the next step. 

### Determine whether to use a semi-automatic rotation

Aside from automatic phase updates, a semi-automatic rotation is identical to a
manual one. It is up to the operator to update any infrastructure to accommodate
the current phase before the grace period elapses.

Teleport does not check the status of any infrastructure that relies on the CA,
meaning that you can lose connectivity if things go wrong. As a result, you
**should not** carry out a semi-automatic rotation if you need to export a CA to

> your infrastructure.

Reviewer 2: @zmb3 what do you think about a code change to just reject automatic rotation requests for several of our CAs? For example, I can't think of a legit use case for doing automatic rotation with `db` or `db_client` CAs, because you have to reissue all of your database certificates or reconfigure them to trust the new CA cert. An automatic rotation will just break access to self-hosted databases like a ticking time bomb.

As far as I know, host and user CA automatic rotation is fine (maybe not user if there are desktops configured?). Not sure about other ones.

> Complete a rotation in  manual mode first to understand all the edge-cases and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Complete a rotation in manual mode first to understand all the edge-cases and
```

as you should be ready to roll back the CA rotation if it does not proceed as
expected.

## How it works

Teleport maintains its CAs independently of one another, and rotating one CA
does not affect the rotation status of the others. The rotation process is
designed to take place in **phases**, which give operators time to update their
infrastructure and roll back a CA rotation if necessary.

Teleport CA rotation takes place in five phases for each CA. The phases have the
following order:

1. `standby`: No rotation in progress. No operations have begun.
1. `init`: A new certificate authority is issued, but not used.
1. `update_clients`: The Teleport Auth Service uses the new CA to sign
   certificates but continues to trust certificates signed by the original CA.
1. `update_servers`: Teleport cluster components (Agents, Auth Service, and
   Proxy Service instances) reload and start serving TLS and SSH certificates
   signed by the new certificate authority, but still accept certificates issued
   by the original certificate authority. This only applies to the Teleport
   [`host` CA](#host).
   1. `standby`: No rotation in progress. All operations have completed.

> Before the final `standby` phase, you an also put the rotation in the `rollback`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before the final `standby` phase, you can also put the rotation in the `rollback`
```

phase, aborting the rotation and returning to the original certificate
authority.

CA rotations can be **manual** or **semi-automatic**. In manual mode, admins
must instruct the Teleport Auth Service to advance from one phase to the next.
Between phases, admins can prepare their infrastructure to adjust to each
change. In semi-automatic mode, the Teleport Auth Service cycles through each
phase automatically, with a grace period between each phase.

## Prerequisites

(!docs/pages/includes/edition-prereqs-tabs.mdx!)

- (!docs/pages/includes/tctl.mdx!)

## Step 1/4. Choose a CA to rotate

When rotating a CA, you need to check that any infrastructure that relies on the
CA has not lost connectivity. You may also need to export the new CA to your
infrastructure. Choose one of the CAs below to determine how to keep it up to
date during the migration.

We recommend rotating a single CA at a time in order to reduce complexity. The

> exception is rotating the `db` and `db_client` CAs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
exception is rotating the `db` and `db_client` CAs. These two CAs must
be rotated together.
```

Not sure if my language here is exactly right, but we should explain what the exception we refer to is.

|CA type|Certificate subjects|
|---|---|
|[`host`](#host)|Teleport Agents. Auth Service and Proxy Service instances.|

> |[`user`](#user)|Teleport users. Teleport SSH Service and Windows Desktop Service instances.|

Reviewer: The _subjects_ in the certificates issued by these CAs are still Teleport users, not Teleport services (those still use the host CA).

|[`db`](#db-and-db_client)|Self-hosted databases protected by Teleport (users must distribute certificates to databases).|

> |[`db_client`](#db-and-db_client)|The Teleport Database Service.|

Reviewer: Is this correct? The Teleport Database Service is a server, right? Seems odd that a server cert would be issued by a client CA?

Reviewer 2: This is correct, the Teleport Database Service is issued a client cert by the `db_client` CA at connection time, which it then uses to authenticate itself to the database as a client.

|[`openssh`](#openssh)|OpenSSH servers enrolled in your Teleport cluster.|

> |[`jwt`](#jwt)|Teleport users|

Reviewer: Perhaps?

```suggestion
|[`jwt`](#jwt)|Teleport users accessing web applications|
```

verify them.

Teleport Agents and Proxy Service instances use **heartbeats** to periodically
report their status to the Teleport Auth Service and update their internal data
to reflect data held by the Auth Service. This internal data includes the status
of the `host` CA rotation if one is in progress.

To check the rotation status of an agent or Proxy Service instance, run a
variation of the following command:

```code
$ tctl get <Var name="resource" /> --format=json | jq '.[] | {hostname: .spec.hostname, rotation: .spec.rotation.state, phase: .spec.rotation.phase}'
{
  "hostname": "terminal",
  "rotation": "in_progress",
  "phase": "init"
}
```

In this example, the Teleport instance named `terminal` has updated its status
to phase `init`. This means it has downloaded a new CA public key and is ready
for state transitions.

You can use the `tctl get` command with the following resources to determine
the rotation state of the `host` CA on each agent kind:

| Role                | `tctl get` value |
|---------------------|------------------|
| Application Service | `app_server`     |
| Database Service    | `db_server`      |

> | Kubernetes Service  | `kube_server`    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Kubernetes Service  | `kube_server`    |
| Windows Desktop Service | `windows_desktop_service` |
```

Assuming rotation status is included for w_d_s

| Proxy Service       | `proxies`        |
| SSH Service         | `nodes`          |

During each phase of the `host` CA rotation, make sure all Agents and Proxy
Service instances have completed the transition to target phase before
proceeding to the next phase. We will explain the phases in [Step
2](#step-2-4-start-a-manual-rotation).

> If you are joining Teleport processes to a cluster via the Teleport Auth Service
> using a [join token](../../agents/join-services-to-your-cluster/join-token.mdx),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are joining Teleport processes to a cluster by dialing the Teleport Auth Service directly,
```

Not sure what the join token has to do with this. All joining requires a join token.

each Teleport process will need a CA pin to trust the Auth Service. The CA pin
will change after each `host` CA rotation. Make sure you use the *new* CA pin
when adding Teleport services after `host` CA rotation.

### `user`

The `user` CA issues a certificate when a user authenticates to Teleport. It

> also signs client certificates for the Windows Desktop Service and Teleport SSH
> Service. Teleport-protected servers and Windows desktops use these certificates

Reviewer: ```suggestion
also signs client certificates for users connecting to Windows desktops and Teleport SSH servers.
Teleport-protected servers and Windows desktops use these certificates
```

to verify connecting clients.

Once you have completed the rotation and reached the final `standby` phase,
users who have signed into Teleport must reauthenticate to receive a user
certificate from the new CA, otherwise Teleport client commands fail.

If you have registered Windows desktops with Teleport, [follow the

> guide](../../desktop-access/active-directory-manual.mdx) to exporting the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
guide](../../desktop-access/active-directory-manual.mdx) to export the
```

- **The application queries the `/.well-known/jwks.json` endpoint of the
  Teleport Proxy Service.** In this case, no action is required as long as the
  application can continue to access the endpoint. If the application caches
  `jwks.json`, invalidate the cache.
- **The application accesses the `jwks.json` file on the local filesystem**.
  Obtain a new `jwks.json` file by querying the `/.well-known/jwks.json`
  endpoint and re-uploading the file.

For an example of exporting the `jwt` CA so a web application can trust
Teleport-issued JWTs, see the guide to [using JWT authentication with
Elasticsearch](../../application-access/jwt/elasticsearch.mdx).

### `saml_idp`

The `saml_idp` CA signs SAML messages sent by the Teleport IdP so services that
rely on the Teleport IdP can verify them.

If you are rotating this CA, then before entering the final `standby` phase, you
must configure any service providers that rely on the Teleport SAML IdP to trust
the Teleport `saml_idp` CA. Follow the instructions in the [SAML IdP
documentation](../../access-controls/idps/saml-guide.mdx) to export an XML
metadata file and make it available to your service provider.

### `oidc_idp`

> The `oidc_idp` CA signs messages sent by the Teleport OIDC IdP integration. AWS

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `oidc_idp` CA signs messages sent by the Teleport OIDC AWS integration. AWS
```

Reviewer 2: We will expand the OIDC integration to other clouds, I think Azure is already in the works.

I would stick with the generic IdP language here, maybe even scrap the AWS specific language and speak generically about "the cloud" or "the relying party"?

verifies these messages to authenticate your Teleport account for features like

> EICE EC2 Access, External Audit Storage, Auto-Discovery, and AWS Sync for Access

Reviewer: I think we removed EICE support from Teleport, didn't we?

Reviewer 2: yes, all the code is still there but we removed the tile from the web ui

Graph. There are two ways to serve the public key for the Teleport `oidc_idp`
certificate authority:

- From the `/.well-known/jwks-oidc` path of the Teleport Proxy Service Web API.

> - From an Amazon S3 bucket.

Reviewer: We are in the process of removing the S3 bucket, so I think we can remove this.

### `oidc_idp`

The `oidc_idp` CA signs messages sent by the Teleport OIDC IdP integration.
Relying parties (e.g., AWS) verify these messages to authenticate your Teleport
account for features like External Audit Storage, Auto-Discovery, and AWS Sync
for Access Graph. 

The Teleport Proxy Service serves the public key for the Teleport `oidc_idp`

> certificate authority from the `/.well-known/jwks-oidc` path of the Web API.

Reviewer 2: nit: I would mention `/.well-known/openid-configuration` as well, which includes the path to the jwks uri, e.g. mine looks like:
```json
{
  "issuer": "https://alpha.devteleport.com",
  "jwks_uri": "https://alpha.devteleport.com/.well-known/jwks-oidc",
  "claims": [
    "iss",
    "sub",
    "obo",
    "aud",
    "jti",
    "iat",
    "exp",
    "nbf"
  ],
  "id_token_signing_alg_values_supported": [
    "RS256"
  ],
  "response_types_supported": [
    "id_token"
  ],
  "scopes_supported": [
    "openid"
  ],
  "subject_types_supported": [
    "public",
    "pair-wise"
  ]
}
```
